Common mistakes with equals() and hashcode()
Forgetting to override hashcode() along with the equals() method or vice versa.
Not overriding equals() and hashcode() when using hash collections like HashSet.
Returning a constant value in the hashcode() method instead of returning a unique code per object.
Using == and equals interchangeably. The == compares Object references, whereas equals() compares object values.

What to remember about equals() and hashcode()
It’s a good practice to always override equals() and hashcode() methods in your POJOs.
Use an effective algorithm to generate a unique hashcode.
When overriding the equals() method, always override the hashcode() method as well.
The equals() method should compare the whole state of objects: values from fields.
The hashcode() method could be the ID of a POJO.
When the result of comparing two object's hashcodes is false, the equals() method should also be false.
If equals() and hashcode() are not overridden when using hash collections, the collection will have duplicate elements.

In order to achieve a fully working custom equality mechanism, it is mandatory to override hashcode() each time you override equals(). 
Follow the tips below and you'll never have leaks in your custom equality mechanism:

If two objects are equal, they MUST have the same hash code.
If two objects have the same hash code, it doesn't mean that they are equal.
Overriding equals() alone will make your business fail with hashing data structures like: HashSet, HashMap, HashTable ... etc.
		HashSet stores its elements in memory buckets. Each bucket is linked to a particular hash code. 
		When calling students.add(alex1), Java stores alex1 inside a bucket and links it to the value of alex1.hashcode(). 
		Now any time an element with the same hash code is inserted into the set, it will just replace alex1. 
		However, since alex2 has a different hash code, it will be stored in a separate bucket and will be considered a totally different object.
Overriding hashcode() alone doesn't force Java to ignore memory addresses when comparing two objects.



The compareTo method is the sole member of the Comparable interface, and is not a member of Object. However, it's quite similar in nature to equals and hashCode. 
It provides a means of fully ordering objects.
An alternative to implementing Comparable is passing Comparator objects as parameters.