Design Twitter:
===============

Use cases / Core features:
Lets define twitter to its MVP (Minimum Viable Product).
1. Users can follow other users
2. Users can read other user's feed whom they follow

Data model:
User and Feed objects
Relation between users - one user following otehr user
Relation between users and feeds - every feed has a owner user

Server feed:
List tweets from users they follow with the most recent at the top. Dont have to list all the tweets. 
Say top 20 at a time - Pagination. The feed could be ranked based on time or other personal traits like
user's common interests. Tweets from users from the same location. Tweets from users with most common friends.
Tweets from famous celebrities followed by the user.

@ and retweet feature. Any feed with the user mentioned using @ also needs to be listed in the feed.
Retweet also include the owner user id to be shown when retweeted.

Talk about the below features:
1. Trending topics
	- Generate and rank the top trending topics. Could be based on frequency of hashtags,
	Search query terms, pick common words/phrases from the topn news topics in the last n hours.
	-Ranking the topics could be based on user's interests (based on favorites, retweets and comments) 
2. Moments
	- Organize the trending topics into pre-defined categories like news, sports, fun etc.
	- List the trending topics and organize them into categories. Rank the tweets in each category.
3. Whom to follow / Recommendation system
	- Recommendation system based on machine learning to recommend other users to follow
	- Provide following graphs users 2 to 3 steps away with common friends, common interests, common location,
	Users with more followers could be ranked higher while listing
	- Also include famous personalities with large number of followers in user's choice of interest
4. Search for feed
	- Weight given to certain social aspects when searching and listing search queries

How to detect fake users  -machine learning systems based on number of followers, tweets and amount of time logged in etc.


